# Genesis

Professor Steven Weitzman, Religious Studies

What is Genesis, what does it mean, what is it trying to tell its readers?

Must consider it in the context of the ancient near east.

We read a lot into the text, assume, etc.

The official Catholic bible is the "vulgate", a Latin translation. The versions we've read are generally based on those.

Ex. there's a pun in the vulgate because "tree of the knowledge of good and evil", "evil" is the same word (or maybe similar word) as "apple", so we think of the fruit as an apple.

Bigger: the bible never says that the books of Moses were written by God, revealed on Mount Sinai, etc.

Bible also never says in Genesis that God is omnipotent, omniscient, perfect. He has to ask questions (Cain, where is your brother?), makes mistakes (regrets creating humans which is why he floods the earth), etc.

## Noah's Flood story

### Aside

James Irwin--8th man to walk on the moon (Apollo 15). Very religious. Thought we might be able to use science to find Noah's Ark as we did to go to the moon.

Got funding for an expedition up Mount Ararat. Found some wood. Carbon dating showed that it was only ~1k years old.

He was projecting his own preconception onto the bible. People think it landed on Mount Ararat, but it was really in "the mountains of Errarat" according to the bible, Ararat being a kingdom. 

---

The Gilgamesh epic was found, has extremely similar flood story, made people realize that the flood story in Genesis maybe just be a version of a common ancient myth rather than a literal story.

Atrahasis epic: even closer to Genesis. 

### Atrahasis Epic

Begins with creation story (like Genesis 1).

#### Creation similarities/differences

Man created of earth in both.

Creator gods are tired in both, the gods rest at the end of both creations.

In Atrahasis, man is created to "take the drudgery" from them. Makes humans to be slaves, working so the gods don't have to. In Christianity, just the opposite--they're made to be rulers of the earth instead.

In Mesopotamia, they build temples as resting places for gods. Genesis, it's a day of rest instead.

#### Destroying Humanity

In Atrahasis, the gods regret making humanity, decide to destroy mankind because they're too noisy. (Though some scholars think people are too noisy becuase there's too many of them--getting out of control.)

Whereas in Genesis, it's because people are evil, in particular by shedding each other's blood.

#### Ship

In Atrahasis, he also has a ship and brings animals aboard.

#### Flood Ends

In Atrahasis, the gods set new rules after the flood to ensure that they don't have to do this again. Establish mortality (people will die now). Establish a class of women who can't reproduce (priestesses). Create a she-demon that snatches away some babies (infant mortality). All population-control measures--this is why people think overpopulation might be the real issue, not just "noise".

Similarly but totally oppositely, Genesis 9: God commands lots of stuff: "Be fruitful and multiply"--have a lot of children, now allows people to eat meat (couldn't before) as long as they don't eat blood because blood = life (which belongs to god), don't kill humans.

---

Clearly, the Noah's Ark story comes from Near Eastern mythology. But it's kind of like an argument with the myths, giving an opposing message.

Evidence: Babel = Babylon, so Tower of Babel (which comes immediately after the flood) suggests that there is something fundamentally wrong with Mesopotamian culture.

## Summary

If we set aside our preconceptions, we discover that the Bible reflects the culture of the society in which it was produced and appreciate what's distinctive about the bible. (Genesis is an argument against the value system of the Mesopotamians.)

"You can read whatever you want into the bible", but "the bible itself is very clear" about stuff that we read in to avoid.
