# Bhagavad Gita

Mark Mancall

## Aryan Migration

No evidence that the story that the Aryans came from Central Asia is true.

Spoke Sanscrit.

Brought the Vedas. Vedas were originally filled with ritual instructions.

Nomadic horse-riders. Most important ceremony was horse sacrifice.

## Castes


Brahmins-head-priest

Kshatria-shoulders/chest-warriors

Vaishas-stomach-merchants

Shudras-peasants/those that make things-feet/legs

Untouchables-no caste

## Upanishads

Record of conversations that took place in the forest (cities too hard to concentrate)

## Revolt

in the 5th or 6th centry BCE. Against castes, texts, etc. Buddha was part of this.

A lot like the 60's.

Founder of Jainism was also part of this.

~2nd century BCE, Vedas come back, rejecting Buddhism and the "hippie" culture. This forms modern Hinduism.

No one is sure if Brahmins or Kshatrias were initially top, but after Hinduism formed, Brahmins were on top.

2 long epics of this time--Ramayana (sp?). 

20 years ago these epics were put on TV, lead to Hindu political revival. 

## (some story)

2 sides of a family--2 groups of brothers.

Karavas have 100. Pandalis have 5, all married to the same wife.

One of the 5 loves to gamble, they gamble for succession, they lose. Then they bet their wife and lose that too.

Pandalis are exiled to the forest.

---

Devotion-physical desire for someone--much more intense.

Some poem says that devotion is a total surrender--cut off your head.

Poetry is meant to be sung.

## Gita

embedded in the Mahabharata.

Foundation of Gandhi's concept of how it should win its independence. Since you can't separate between yourself and the universe, the Gita speaks not only as a political document but also how to live your own life personally.

Strongly influenced by Buddhism. Even though it's Hindu(ish)

Posits the existence of one reality. Only way to get back in harmony with that reality is through practices given in the Gita.

Yoga = yolk = discipline. 4 disciplines:

* Karma of action. Ch 1-6. Must always consider what you're doing.
* Jnana. of knowledge. Ch 7-12. Deep discipline at trying to understand the world as well as possible.
* Bhakti. Total surrender. Surrender to god, teacher, etc. Ch 13-18. 

A lot of it is totally unBuddhist--eg. Buddhism thinks dharma doesn't ultimately exist.

Gandhi supported the caste system, thought it was being handled in unjust way. Wanted equality, wanted untouchables allowed in temples. Was fine with dividing society into function--many think that's good.

Re unexplicit morality: "It's hard work being a human being. You can't just look it up in a book"

## How deeply ingrained the caste system was

Indian communists have servants and are against them learning.

Many Indians became Muslims and Buddhists to escape caste system.
